---
layout: post
title: "31 For 31" 
header: Blog
summary: Songs for my 31st birthday.
categories: [Music, Playlists]
link: /31-for-31/
---
# 31 For 31
I’m turning 31 this year, a number I have a surprising number of feelings about. In recognition, if not celebration, of the occasion, please enjoy 31 songs from 1992. 31 for 31. No, these songs don’t represent 1992 perfectly. I hope, though, that they capture some of what made that year compelling and complicated musically. I also hope they capture some of what I love about the music of 1992. There’s a little metal, though little of it from bands in their prime. (Bolt Thrower is probably the exception there. Or Darkthrone?) There’s a little bit of everything, I suppose. That’s what I want, I think. A little bit of everything with a solid dose of decent riffs thrown in for good measure. Horns up and, as self-congratulatory as this is, here’s to (at least) 31 more years, to more music and complication and wonder. 

You can listen to the playlist on [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/2YMm4iMk7di2Y5nbJJSRHj?si=6201a4f5d8a4474e) or [Apple Music](https://music.apple.com/us/playlist/31-for-31/pl.u-11aYH5xKEk).

*Spotify and Apple Music aren’t exactly posterity-proof, are they? Just in case those services wander away into the ether at some point, here is the list in full:*
- Dream Theater - “Under a Glass Moon”
- King’s X - “Black Flag”
- Whitney Houston - “I Will Always Love You”
- Mariah Carey - “I’ll Be There”
- Weird Al - “Smells Like Nirvana”
- Iron Maiden - “Fear of the Dark”
- Black Sabbath - “I”
- Blind Guardian - “The Bard’s Song - In the Forest”
- Nine Inch Nails - “Wish”
- R.E.M. - “Find The River”
- Alice In Chains - “Rain When I Die”
- Bolt Thrower - “The IVth Crusade”
- Pete Rock & C.L. Smooth - “Straighten It Out”
- Gang Starr - “No Shame In My Game”
- Terence Blanchard - “Blues For Malcolm”
- Trisha Yearwood - “Down On My Knees”
- Emmylou Harris - “Hard Times - Live”
- Selena - “Si La Quieres”
- Janet Jackson - “The Best Things In Life Are Free”
- Queen and George Michael - “Somebody To Love - Live At The Freddie Mercury Concert For AIDS Awareness, Wembley / 1992”
- Madonna - “Deeper and Deeper”
- Manic Street Preachers - “Nat West-Barclays-Midlands-Lloyds”
- Tori Amos - “Precious Things”
- Darkthrone - “In the Shadow of the Horns”
- Los Lobos - “Kiko and the Lavender Moon”
- Mary J. Blige - “Sweet Thing”
- William Finn - “What More Can I Say?”
- Lucinda Williams - “Sweet Old World”
- Sinéad O’Connor - “Success Has Made a Failure of Our Home”
- Alejandro Fernández - “Necesito Olvidarla”
- Leonard Cohen - “The Future”