---
layout: post
title: "No-Knead Bread"
header: Recipes
summary: Modifications I've made to a no-knead bread recipe.
link: /no-knead/
---
# No-Knead Bread
This recipe is adapted from the Mark Bittman/Jim Lahey recipe in [the *New York Times*](https://cooking.nytimes.com/recipes/11376-no-knead-bread?q=no%20knead%20bre). I have made changes that reflect a few things that I found worked better for me. You'll also see a few options for additions I've enjoyed. I may come back and add more of those in the future — I'll see what works!
## Ingredients
- 300 grams all-purpose flour
- 130 grams whole wheat flour
- 1 gram yeast
- 12 grams kosher salt
- 345 grams water

## Directions
1. Combine the flours, yeast, and salt in a large bowl. Add any additions at this point, then add the water and stir until you have a shaggy, sticky dough. Place the dough in a lightly oiled bowl, then cover[^1] and leave it to rest for 12-18 hours.[^2]

2. Remove the dough from the bowl and place it on a lightly floured work surface. Fold the dough over itself 5 times[^3], then leave it to rest for 15 minutes.

3. On your floured work surface, shape the dough into a round loaf or ball. Cover it with a lightly floured cotton towel[^4] and leave it to rise for 2 hours, or until doubled in size.

4. 30 minutes before the end of the rise, place a covered dutch oven on a rack set in the middle of your oven. Preheat the oven to 450°.

## Additions
1.

### Footnotes
[^1]: Recipes often suggest covering bread dough with plastic wrap. This winds up being pretty wasteful, I think, so I prefer to use a bowl with a cover.
[^2]: I tend to err on the side of leaving the dough for 18 hours. My house runs cold, so leaving the yeast to work for a little while longer makes a happier loaf. I also find the flavor is deeper after the longer rise.
[^3]: Many recipes, including the original, recommend a single fold. That's all well and good, but I like that the additional folds give the final loaf a little more structure. 
[^4]: Not one of the fuzzy ones! You'll want just plain cloth for this. 